day 9
Loops I
In many situations, we want to execute a piece of code repeatedly.

Imagine you are watering different plants in your garden. You have a container full of water, and you pour water onto each plant one by one. You continue pouring water until the container is empty. As long as there is water in the container, you keep watering the plants. Once the container is empty, you stop pouring.

In programming, this process is like a loop, where we repeat a task (pouring water onto the plants) as long as the condition is true. The loop keeps checking the condition (whether there is still water in the container) and continues executing the code inside it. The moment the condition becomes false (when the container is empty), the loop stops, and the program moves on to execute the code after the loop.

while condition:  

    code inside loop

    # Executes as long as the condition is true

code outside loop    

# Executes once the condition becomes false

Just like with if-else statements, the condition used inside a loop is an expression that evaluates to either True or False. The loop keeps running when the condition is True. Once the condition becomes False, the loop stops, and the program continues with the next lines of code below the loop.

When the condition is True, the code keeps executing.

When the condition becomes False, the loop stops, and the program continues to execute the code after the loop.

Flowchart Representation of a Loop
Here is a flowchart to represent how loops work:

While Loop Flowchart

Start: The program begins.

Check condition: The program checks if the condition is True or False.

If True: Execute the code inside the loop.

Repeat: Go back to checking the condition again.

If False: Exit the loop and proceed with the code below.

Indentation in Python
In Python, we use indentation to tell the computer which part of the code is inside the loop and which is not. Indentation helps define the block of code that will be repeated while the condition is true.

Here’s how it works:

Indentation: It’s the space we add at the beginning of each line to define the structure of the code. In Python, the standard practice is to use 4 spaces for indentation, although 2 spaces can also be used, as long as it’s consistent throughout your code.

Inside the loop: The code that should be repeated goes inside the loop and is indented. All lines of code inside the loop should be indented to the same level. This tells Python that these lines are part of the loop.

Example of Proper Indentation in a Loop

while condition:  

    print("Watering plant")  # Indented, code inside the loop

    water_level -= 1  # Indented, part of the loop

In the example above:

The print("Watering plant") and water_level -= 1 are inside the loop because they are indented.

Both lines of code inside the loop start from the same indentation level, ensuring that they are part of the loop.

Why is Indentation Important?
Consistency is Key: Every line of code inside the loop must start at the same indentation level. If one line is indented differently, Python will raise an IndentationError because it won’t know which lines belong to the loop and which do not.
Example of Indentation Error

while condition:  

    print("Watering plant")  # Indented, part of the loop

  water_level -= 1  # This line has incorrect indentation

In the example above, the second line (water_level -= 1) is indented with an extra space, which will cause an IndentationError.
Exiting the Loop
Once the loop finishes, the indentation returns to the starting level. This indicates that the code below the loop is not inside the loop anymore and will be executed after the loop ends.

Example 1: Correct Indentation

while condition:  

    print("Watering plant")  # Indented, part of the loop

    water_level -= 1  # Indented, part of the loop



print("The loop has finished.")  # Not indented, runs after the loop

In this example:

The print("Watering plant") and water_level -= 1 lines are indented, meaning they are inside the loop.

"The loop has finished." is not indented, so it runs only once after the loop ends.

Example 2: Incorrect Indentation (Mistake)

while condition:  

    print("Watering plant")  # Indented, part of the loop

water_level -= 1  # This line is at position 1, so it's outside the loop

print("Water level decreased")  # Not indented, runs after the loop

In this example:

The water_level -= 1 line starts at position 1, which means it is outside the loop, even though we wanted it to be part of the loop.

If the indentation is incorrect, Python will treat the water_level -= 1 line as being outside the loop and it won't repeat with each loop iteration.

This is how the computer understands your instructions. A block of code with consistent indentation is considered inside the loop, and the code without indentation is considered outside the loop. The loop will keep running the indented code as long as the condition is true. Once the loop ends, any code that is not indented will run just once, outside the loop.

Summary:
Indentation indicates which code is inside the loop.

Code inside the loop is indented (either 2 or 4 spaces).

Inconsistent indentation will lead to an IndentationError.

Once the loop finishes, the program continues with the code after the loop, which is not indented.

This concept of indentation is the same as in if-elif-else statements, where the code inside the conditions is also indented.

Ensuring the Loop Stops
When using loops, we have to ensure that the condition eventually becomes false, otherwise the code inside the loop will continue to run forever. This is known as an infinite loop, we will talk about it the next day.

Running the Loop a Fixed Number of Times
In many cases, we want the loop to run a fixed number of times.

To achieve this, we introduce a loop variable that tracks how many times the loop has executed. We update this variable each time the loop runs and use it as part of the condition to decide whether the loop should continue or stop.

Example: Running a Loop 5 Times

i = 0  # Initialize the loop variable



while i < 5:  # Check if the loop has run less than 5 times

    i = i + 1  # Increase the value of i by 1 to indicate the loop has run one more time

    print("Hello World")



print("Bye")  # This will print once the loop has ended

How This Works:

We start by initializing the loop variable i to 0. This means that the loop has not run yet.

Each time the loop runs, the condition i < 5 is checked. This means we are checking if the loop has run less than 5 times.

If the condition i < 5 is true, meaning if the loop has run less than 5 times, the loop will continue to run again.

Inside the loop, we increase i by 1 each time (i = i + 1) to keep track that the loop has run one more time.

Every time the loop runs, we print "Hello World".

Once i becomes 5, the condition i < 5 is no longer true, meaning the loop has already run 5 times, the loop will stop. The program then prints "Bye".

In short, this code prints "Hello World" 5 times.

Loops are very powerful. So instead of memorising the code to print something 5 times, try to understand each part of it, so that you can use the concept of loop to do more meaningful things.