day 11
Write About Your Strengths and Weaknesses

My Strength:

Consistancy-I belief that succsess is not about big steps but small steps every day. If I wait for motivation, I will never do anything So I make sure to do work daily even when I don’t feel like even if the progress is slow but i know it is still progress.Example- I have more consistancy with my studies because one time i was last in class and that make me feel bad. But next year with my consistancy of studies i came 3rd in class.

Patience- Good things comes if we wait i know that sometimes things take longer than i want but I dont lose hope. Even if I fail i will try again. Rushing never helps, so I just keep trying until I get better.Example-I read book patiently because once I was very used to my phone. I see Instagram like 4-5 hours a day and I think that kills my patiences. So, I have start reading book, and that help me lot. Now, I feel more focused and calm.

Hard Working- Nothing is easy in life. If we want to suceed, we have to work hard. I always try my best in all task, big or small. Some people stop when it get difficult, but I keep going because I know my effort will be worth it.Example- I do work very hard and consistent. When I was in Class 12, I tuition some student and do some part-time job because of family problems. It was not easy to manage studies and work together, but I never gave up. This experience made me stronger and more responsible.

My Weakness:

Focus- I some time find hard to focus on one thing for long time. My mind goes somewhere else, and I start thinking of other things instead of what I am doing.example - I trying to be better by not using phone too much, taking small breaks and trying to sit in quiet place.

Time Management- I have problem to manage my time and I try to do many things at same time and then I not finish them properly example- so fix this I make time table for whole day that make me to do my work on timely.

Speaking Up with Confidence- I some times struggle to talk with confidence, specially in front of new people. Even when I have good ideas, I dont say them because I feel I will make mistake. This make my comunication weak. I am trying to talk more with people practice speaking slow and not worry about mistake. example - While their is a HVA 6 people group discussion first I fell very nervous then I make my self calm and talk's to them and them I fell good and we all decide to talk very weakend that will make you communication skill good.