Getting Started with Python
What is Python?
Just like how we communicate with each other in languages like English, Hindi, Tamil, or Telugu, computers also have their own programming languages that we use to give them instructions. Some examples of programming languages are Python and JavaScript.

In human languages, we use words, grammar, and rules around them that make the language understandable. If we don't follow them, it becomes hard to understand each other. Similarly, computers have syntax, which is like grammar in programming. If we make mistakes in the syntax, the computer won't understand what we want them to do. That's why it's important to be very specific in what we write.

We will be using Python because it is one of the simplest programming languages to learn and understand, making it a great choice for beginners.

Using Programiz Python Compiler
In order to use Python, we need to install the Python compiler on your computer. Depending on your operating system, the instructions to install Python and use it will vary.

However, to make things easier at the start, we will use an online Python compiler. By the end of the day, we will expect all of you to install the Python compiler on your computer and run at least one program there.

We will use the Programiz Python Compiler for now. Here's the link to the Programiz Python Compiler. This online tool allows you to write and run Python code directly in your browser without needing to install anything on your computer. It's a great way to quickly get started and experiment with Python.

Programmer and User
We learned about who a programmer is yesterday. The programmer is the person who gives instructions to a computer. So, you are the programmer, or soon becoming one.

Then, we have a user—the one who interacts with the program you have written.

Yesterday, you gave instructions to your brother to get you a chocolate. You were the programmer, your brother was the computer, and the language you spoke to give him instructions is the programming language. When your brother was following the instructions, the program you wrote was running. While following the instructions, your brother interacted with a few people, like the shopkeeper. The shopkeeper is the user who is using the program.

So, when we write a program, it is expected that some users will use it. But during our learning phase or development phase, we will be the users testing our own program.

It is important for you to be aware of this difference—when you are a programmer and when you are acting like a user.

Print: Print a String, Print a Number
Any code you see in this article, you must immediately run it on the compiler.

Python comes with predefined functions. These are like things that the computer already knows, and we can make use of them.

print is one such function. We use this function when we want the computer to display something on the screen. We can pass information to this function about what we want to print.

Example 1: Printing a String
In programming, text and numbers are different. When we write a text, we have to use inverted commas. We call this a string. Here's how you can print a string:

print("Hello, World!") # This will print a string

This displays the text "Hello, World!" to the screen. Notice the inverted commas around the text.

Example 2: Printing a Number
You can also print numbers without using inverted commas. Here's an example:

print(10) # This will print a number

This will print the number 10. There are no inverted commas around the number.

Key Points to Remember:
When you want to print text, use inverted commas.

When you want to print a number, just write the number without inverted commas.

Print on the Same Line and New Line
By default, the print() function prints each output on a new line. Let’s see an example where two things are printed, and they appear on two different lines:

print("Hello")  # This will print "Hello" on the first line

print("World!")  # This will print "World!" on the second line

Output:

Hello

World!

Now, if we want to print things on the same line, we can use the end="" parameter in the print() function. Here’s how we can do that:

print("Hello", end=" ")

print("World!")  # This will print "Hello World!" on the same line

Output:

Hello World!

In this case, we used end=" " to add a space after printing "Hello", which keeps the next output on the same line.

Variable
A variable is used to store information that you can use later in the program. Variables are like containers where we can keep data. To create a variable, just assign a value to it. Here’s an example:

name = "Alice"  # This is a string variable

age = 25  # This is a number variable

print(name)  # Output: Alice

print(age)  # Output: 25

In this case, name is a variable that stores the value "Alice", and age stores the value 25. We can print these variables later in the program.

Note: We are printing name without inverted commas, it will print the value it stores and not the "name" text.

Input
input is another pre-defined function, which is used to take some information from the user.

name = input()  # This will take the input from the user and store it in the variable 'name'

print(name)  # This will print the value stored in 'name'

We store that information in a variable, so that we can use it for anything. Here we are simply printing it.

We can also give some string to this input() function. It will display that information to the user to make the user clear about what the computer is asking for.

name = input("Enter your name: ")  

print(name)  # This will print what the user enters

This is mostly to tell the user what is expected as input. However, in most cases, we will avoid giving this instruction. Since we will act like users ourselves, we know what is expected as input.

Input Number
When you use input(), everything you enter is treated as a string (text), even if it's a number. If you want to perform calculations with the input, you need to convert it into a number type (like int or float).

age = input("Enter your age: ")  # This is treated as a string

age = int(age)  # Convert the string into an integer

print(age + 1)  # Adds 1 to the age

In this example, the program takes the user’s input, converts it into an integer, and then adds 1 to it.

Arithmetic Operation
Once we have inputs (such as numbers), we can perform arithmetic operations on them, like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Here's an example of a simple arithmetic operation:

num1 = int(input())

num2 = int(input())

result = num1 + num2  # Adds the two numbers

print("The sum is:", result)  # Prints the result

In this case, the program asks for two numbers, adds them together, and prints the sum.

Summary of the Article
In this article, we covered the basics of Python programming and important concepts that you need to understand:

What is Python?

Python is a simple and beginner-friendly programming language. Like human languages, Python uses syntax and rules to help us communicate with computers, giving them instructions to perform specific tasks.
Programmer and User:

A programmer is someone who gives instructions to a computer, while a user interacts with the program to get the results. When you write a program, you are the programmer, and during the learning phase, you will also act as the user testing your own program.
Using Programiz Python Compiler:

In order to write and execute Python programs, we use an online Python compiler. The Programiz Python Compiler is a great tool for beginners to run code directly in the browser without the need to install anything. Eventually, you will install Python on your computer and run programs locally.
Print: Print a String, Print a Number:

The print() function is used to display output on the screen. We learned how to print a string (text) and a number, and the important distinction between the two.

Additionally, we learned how to control whether the output appears on a new line or the same line using the end="" parameter in the print() function.

Variable:

A variable is used to store information. You can assign values to variables and use them later in your program. We also learned that when you print a variable, it will display the value it stores, not the name of the variable.
Input:

The input() function allows us to take information from the user. We learned how to use this function to prompt the user for input and store it in a variable. This input is typically treated as a string, but we can convert it into a number if needed, using functions like int().
Input Number:

We explored how to take input from the user, treat it as a string, and then convert it into a number using the int() function. This enables us to perform arithmetic operations with the input.
Arithmetic Operation:

After gathering input, we can perform arithmetic operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. We learned how to take multiple inputs, perform calculations, and display the results.