day 12
Dry Running
Phases of Solving a Coding Problem
When writing code, there are two main parts to the process:

The Thinking Phase: This is where we spend time deciding what needs to be done and how to solve the problem. The thinking phase should take the majority of our time. It involves spending time with pen and paper and thinking and arriving at the solution to the problem.

The Implementation Phase: This is the phase where we convert our thoughts into actual code. After fully thinking through the solution, we begin writing the code that implements it. The more detailed our thinking, the less time it will take to implement the code. Ideally, this phase should also be done using pen and paper first, writing out the code on paper before transferring it to the computer.

Implementation Errors
While coding, we may face issues in two stages:

Thinking Phase: We may struggle to come up with a clear solution to the problem.

Implementation Phase: Even after having a clear solution in mind, mistakes may occur when converting our thoughts into actual code.

It’s especially common in the implementation phase to make mistakes that lead to incorrect output. Often, we don’t realize these mistakes immediately because the way we think we will write the code and the way we actually write it, often differ. This is particularly true for beginners who may not yet have full control over their coding process.

What is Dry Running?
Dry running helps to address these mistakes by allowing us to track where we’ve deviated from our original thought process and where we’ve written something differently than intended. It’s a process used to find errors in our code without relying on others, programs, or tools.

Dry running helps us:

Catch mistakes during the implementation phase.

Understand the flow of the code and how variables change.

Identify discrepancies between our initial thought process and the actual implementation.

Note: Dry running is not about finding the right solution. It is only about finding mistakes in our existing code.

The Process of Dry Running
Dry running is a technique where we simulate the execution of our code step by step, exactly as the computer would. This process helps us identify potential errors before actually running the code. Here’s how we can dry run our code effectively:

Prepare Our Paper:

Divide the paper into two sections:

Variables Section: For tracking the values of our variables.

Output Section: For noting anything that is printed by the code.

Track the Variables:

In the Variables Section, list all the variables in our code.

Leave enough space between variables to update their values as they change.

Simulate the Code Execution:

Read through the code line by line, simulating how the computer would execute it.

As we come across a variable, write it down in the Variables Section with its current value.

If a variable’s value changes, strike out the old value and write the new one.

Track the Output:

Whenever the code prints something, write it in the Output Section.
Continue the Process:

Continue reading through the code, updating the variable values and noting the outputs as we go.

Complete this process until we’ve gone through the entire code.

Key Points to Remember
Avoid Shortcuts: During the dry running process, there should be no shortcuts. We need to follow each step carefully as the computer would, ensuring we simulate the code accurately.

No Biases: We should not assume anything about the code’s behavior. Dry running should be done thoroughly, without any preconceived notions.

Catch Errors Early: This process helps us identify errors early and gain a clearer understanding of the logic behind our code.

By following this process, we will not only catch potential mistakes but also improve our problem-solving skills and understanding of the code flow. Dry running is an effective method to ensure that our implementation aligns with our original solution and that our code runs as expected.

Dry Running Example: A Simple While Loop
Let’s walk through a simple while loop code example step by step. As you read each line, do the dry running on paper, following the process we discussed earlier.

Code Example:

x = 1

while x <= 3:

    print(x)

    x = x + 1

Step-by-Step Dry Running:
Prepare Your Paper:

Variables Section: Leave enough space to track the value of x as it changes.

Output Section: Leave space to note down the printed outputs.

Initialize Variables:

Code: x = 1

Variables Section: Write down the initial value of x.

x = 1
Output Section: Leave it empty for now, since nothing is printed yet.

Start the While Loop:

Code: while x ≤ 3:

The condition is x ≤ 3. Since x = 1, this is True, so the loop will execute.
First Iteration of the Loop:

Code: print(x)

The value of x is 1, so write 1 in the Output Section.

Variables Section: x = 1

Output Section: 1

Code: x = x + 1

Update the value of x to 2.

Variables Section: x = 2

Second Iteration of the Loop:

Code: while x ≤ 3:

The condition x ≤ 3 is still True since x = 2.
Code: print(x)

The value of x is now 2, so write 2 in the Output Section.

Variables Section: x = 2

Output Section: 1 2

Code: x = x + 1

Update the value of x to 3.

Variables Section: x = 3

Third Iteration of the Loop:

Code: while x ≤ 3:

The condition x ≤ 3 is still True since x = 3.
Code: print(x)

The value of x is now 3, so write 3 in the Output Section.

Variables Section: x = 3

Output Section: 1 2 3

Code: x = x + 1

Update the value of x to 4.

Variables Section: x = 4

Exit the Loop:

Code: while x ≤ 3:

The condition x ≤ 3 is now False because x = 4, so the loop stops.
Final Result:

Variables Section: x = 4 (After the loop ends)

Output Section: 1 2 3

Since the output section shows 1 2 3, the given program will print 1 2 3.